---
title: CourseFlow Enhanced ERD and Data Modelling
description:
  In-depth explanation of the ERD and handling of data in CourseFlow within the context of OnTrack.
---

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Diagrams](#diagrams)
- [Analysis of the Entity Relationships](#analysis-of-the-entity-relationships)
  - [User and Course Map](#user-and-course-map)
  - [Course Map and Course](#course-map-and-course)
  - [Course Map and Course Map Unit](#course-map-and-course-map-unit)
  - [Unit Offering, Unit and Course Map Unit](#unit-offering-unit-and-course-map-unit)
  - [Unit and Teaching period](#unit-and-teaching-period)
  - [Unit, Unit Specialization and Specialization](#unit-unit-specialization-and-specialization)
  - [Course, Units and Requirements](#course-units-and-requirements)

## Introduction

This document aims to provide a detailed overview of the data that will be required for CourseFlow
through the use of diagrams and text based explanations.

## Diagrams

---

This section will present some diagrams that will be referenced multiple times throughout the
document.

The diagram below provides an easier to digest, high-level overview of the more detailed Entity
Relationship Diagram (ERD).

![Courseflow High Level Entity Relationship](/courseflow-high-level-entity-relationship.png)

The next diagram is the fully fleshed out ERD with the different fields and relationships to other
entities.

![Courseflow Enhanced ERD](/courseflow-enhanced-erd.png)

## Analysis of the Entity Relationships

---

This section will provide a detailed analysis of the key entities of CourseFlow and how they will
relate to each other.

### User and Course Map

The users entity already exists within OnTrack and it represents the users of the system (students
etc.). Since CourseFlow will be a new feature of OnTrack, it can utilize this entity for association
to a CourseMap. The aim of this relationship is to associate a student with a single course map and
this is achieved by referencing the user id of the User entity within the CourseMap entity.

Functionally, a student entering the CourseFlow section of OnTrack can use their user id in the API
request and fetch their respective course map. If a course map for that student does not exist, we
would then have a POST request to add a new course map. Additional functionality with the
appropriate route can be added to handle templates for the course map where we can return
pre-defined course maps where a lack of a user id marks them as templates. Once a template is
selected, we can make a POST request with that pre-defined data to add a new entry to the respective
entities (CourseMap and CourseMapUnit).

### Course Map and Course

This is a simple association. Essentially, each course map will be associated with a single course
that the student is enrolled in.

Functionally, when the course map data is received, a different API request can be made to a course
related route to retrieve the course data via the course id which will be stored with the course map
entity. This data will then be used to load up course related information on the client side (since
requirements is in another table, we would make a separate request for all course requirements using
the course id).

Adding new courses to the system can be done via the POST route where data can be imported or added
manually in an admin panel (possible communication with Student Connect in the future). However,
considerations will need to be made in terms of how a course will be associated to a student who
does not have a course map and therefore, does not have an attached course id (which also prevents
getting templates). This association can be created upon creation of the course map through
communication with Deakin's API. However, in the case where we don't have access to a student's
enrolment, an alternative is to introduce a client side interface for a student to chose their
enrolled course. A simple search functionality with some filters for year etc. can facilitate this
functionality.

It is worth mentioning just for extra clarity that the course version the course map is referencing
will be important due to possible changes in the course in each year. For example, students who
enrolled in the 2021 version of Computer Science need to follow requirements specific to that
intake. The 2022 version of Computer Science introduced major/minor sequences which is not
applicable to 2021 enrolled students. This requirement is catered for by having a separate entry
within the course data for different years and versions (technically speaking, each new year would
count as a different version but this field is present just incase a change is made within the year
itself and we might need to keep track of the older versions).

### Course Map and Course Map Unit

Each course map will consist of course map units which will form a core aspect of CourseFlow as this
is what students will be dragging and dropping into slots on the client side to construct their
course map.

As such, this system needs to store the course map units and have them all associated to their
respective course map. In this specific CourseMapUnits entity, each entry will represent a single
unit which will reference the course map they belong to. So, upon loading the course map, we can use
the course map id and fetch all the respective units. Entry specific ids can then be used for any
updates made to the course map unit (updating their placement in the trimester on year containers).
Adding new course map units will involve the usage of the Unit entity and creating instances of it
upon selection or drag and drop operations on the client side.

In terms of the course map unit itself, we simply need to keep track of which year, teaching period
and unit slot they were contained in when originally set by the student (or within the template).
This will allow the unit to appear in the correct slot when loaded and can be used for logic to
restrict placement of the unit in incorrect spots.

### Unit Offering, Unit and Course Map Unit

The handling of units can be relatively complex.

The idea behind what the diagrams represent is that we are creating instances of a unit based on a
base unit. Units Offering is a proposed name change of an existing table in OnTrack for units with
has information such as the name and unit code. The idea here is to have this entity as the base
unit.

The Unit entity will then be instantiating the base unit information from Unit Offering and will
have more information such as the year, version, teaching period and url to the handbook which will
all be represented as a new entry in the data. Similar to courses, we need to keep track of each
version of a unit so that the course map unit references the correct version of the unit a student
would have taken. This could be further extended to utilize OnTrack's Project Entity to keep track
of the correct unit enrolment and to perhaps use to see if the student has passed the unit. This
approach however will require further considerations for units not used with OnTrack and as such,
will be left out of the diagrams for now.

Finally, the course map unit will be an instance of a specific unit instance (with the specific year
and teaching period) per coursemap and in itself, will contain its own relevant information
regarding slot positions. This way, the course map will always retain the correct version of the
unit that a student would have taken.

In terms of adding new units to the system, we can leverage out OnTrack's admin panel and add in an
additional interface for unit variants (different teaching periods, years etc.). Fetching specific
versions of units will be done via presentation of unit requirements (which will tie to a unit
instance) or presentation of electives in the respective interfaces on the client side (which will
allow for filtering based on specializations, teaching periods and years).

### Unit and Teaching period

This relationship is relatively simple. We need to keep track of each teaching period and keep the
naming generic to be used by other Universities. Here, we simply keep track of the label (trimester
1 etc.), the year and the teaching time frame.

Each unit entry will then reference a teaching period id. For example, "Introduction to Programming"
in 2021 could be taken in either trimester 1 or 2. So, in the units table, we would have two
entries, each of them referencing the teaching period relevant to them for the given year.

### Unit, Unit Specialization and Specialization

The idea behind the Unit Specialization entity is to associate multiple specializations to a
specific instance/entry of a unit. To avoid having to have the same specialization label appear
multiple times across different units and to make it easier to fetch a list of specializations, a
Specialization entity was created to hold all specializations. This way, the Unit Specialization
entity can reference the respective specialization id. This also opens up possibilities for
associating courses to specializations if ever required down the line.

Functionally, when we proceed to add a new unit, we would have a specific panel for associating the
specializations. Here, we can fetch the specializations and present them as a drop down menu (or any
other kind of list based UI element) and as we select the specializations, we can make POST requests
to the Unit Specialization and create separate entries associating the specific unit instance to the
specialization/s. We can introduce an input box for adding completely new specializations here too.

### Course, Units and Requirements

The requirements related entities will by far, be the most complex aspect of CourseFlow. However,
this forms a crucial and core aspect of the system and as such, needs to be explored and analyzed
properly.

The idea behind the Requirements entity is that each requirement for a course or unit will be
treated as a single entry. For example, we can have these as separate entries:

- Complete Introduction to Programming as a pre-requisite to the Object Oriented Programming unit.
- Complete a minimum of these 18 core units for Bachelor of Computer Science.

These would be classified as count based requirements where you need to complete a minimum number of
units linked to an actual list of units based on the requirement set group id. This is another
entity where each entry would contain a unit id or requirement id for a respective requirement set
group id. This can then be used in conjunction with the requirement to see if units have been
placed/completed within the course map.

The possible point of confusion will be the above mentioned requirement id within the Requirement
Set entity. The idea behind this a nesting/chaining of requirements to build a group of requirements
that can be chosen out of the given options. As an example, for recent versions of the Computer
Science degree, major/minor sequences are part of the requirements. Here, we can chain the
requirements for picking a major sequence:

1. The Requirement table would have an entry for completing a minimum of 1 where we reference a
   requirement set.
2. The requirement set would have entries referencing requirement ids corresponding to different
   major sequences.
3. These requirement entries making up the major sequence would be a minimum count and then
   reference another requirement set containing the required units for that major (each entry would
   have the respective unit id and the same group id).

Overall, we can build a requirements table where each unit or course will have multiple requirements
referenced by the unit or course id.

In terms of updating and adding new requirements, this would be an interface present in the
course/unit admin panel where we will fill this out. The good thing about this approach is that we
can fetch existing requirements and requirement sets and then re-use them for other courses and
units by using the data to create new entries.
